---
date: "2020-03-02"
diagram: 
image:
  caption: 'Image credit: [**NBC News**](https://www.nbcnews.com/better/lifestyle/how-break-your-therapist-learn-something-it-ncna980581)'
  placement: 3
title: How can the way that psychological therapy is delivered by the therapist enhance the benefits for the patient?
summary: The therapeutic alliance is an important component in the delivery of successful psychotherapy. This essay will discuss the evidence on how exactly this alliance is useful for patients.
---

## Introduction

Despite much of the empirical evidence highlighting the improvements in patients’ outcome from particular psychological therapies (e.g., Hofmann, Asnaani, Vonk, Sawyer & Fang, 2012), there are also significant benefits from non-specific psychotherapy factors which are used across psychotherapies (e.g., Webb, DeRubeis & Barber, 2010). These factors include therapist adherence, the therapeutic alliance, and therapist competence, to name a few (Tschuschke et al., 2015). This essay will focus on the importance of the therapeutic alliance (TA) in benefitting the patient by means of reducing symptoms and distress. The TA involves a collaboration built between therapist and patient (Buchholz & Abramowitz, 2020). The tripartite model of TA dissects this collaboration into a mutually supportive bond, an agreement on treatment goals, and an agreement on the tasks incorporated to reach those goals (Bordin, 1979). In order to justify and argue that the TA is an important component in the delivery of successful psychotherapy, the following argument will be outlined. Firstly, the robust and consistent finding that the TA is associated with psychotherapy outcome will be discussed. Secondly, a potential causal link between TA and patient outcome will be suggested with research that controls for the time at which TA and outcomes are measured. This will additionally shed light on the benefits of forming an early TA in psychotherapy. Thirdly, it will be suggested that the TA itself not only predicts positive psychotherapy outcomes, but additionally moderates the effect of other non-specific therapy factors. Finally, the therapist’s responsiveness to ruptures that arise within the TA may be one mechanism within the delivery of therapy that enhances treatment success.

## The importance of the therapeutic alliance

Patients’ outcomes within psychotherapy have consistently been shown to be moderately related to the TA (Fluckiger, Del Re, Wampold & Horvath, 2018; Horvath, Del Re, Fluckiger & Symonds, 2011; Martin, Garske & Davis, 2000). In a recent meta-analysis based on 295 independent samples which included 100 randomised controlled trials (RCT), Fluckiger et al. (2018) revealed an overall mean weighted effect size between alliance and patient outcome of r = .28. Thus, on average, the greater the TA, the greater the patient outcome. Whilst this effect size is only moderate and accounts for 8% of the total variance, it is greater than that of other non-specific therapist factors, such as therapist competence (i.e., the therapist’s expertise) and therapist adherence (i.e., the extent to which therapists’ adhere to a protocol), with an effect size of .07 and .02, respectively (Webb et al., 2010). Despite this meta-analysis finding high heterogeneity across the data (i.e., high variability), moderation analysis indicated that this was not due to treatment type, as they found no significant differences in effect sizes between psychotherapies. What this may suggest is that the TA is a pan-theoretical factor that can consistently show a robust, moderate relationship with patient outcome. This highlights that therapists should perhaps focus on building a strong TA, as it is a central factor in yielding greater patient outcomes across psychotherapies. 
Whilst meta-analytic data that measures TA at one particular time point within therapy is important for highlighting its positive relation to therapy outcomes, studies which control for temporal confounds offer more compelling support that a stronger alliance precedes beneficial outcomes (Webb et al., 2012; Zilcha-Mano & Errazuriz, 2015). For instance, Zilcha-Mano and Errazuriz (2015) conducted an RCT with patients allocated to one of several therapist feedback conditions including a condition receiving no feedback. As it would be of ethical concern to allocate patients to a condition whereby the therapist does not attempt to build a TA, the therapist feedback variable offers a similar yet ethical method to conduct such an experiment. Therapist feedback is similar because it enables the dyad to negotiate and collaborate through discussion of the patient’s thoughts, feelings and behaviours, which would build a TA (Zilcha-Mano & Errazuriz, 2015). The researchers assessed TA using the well-established Working Alliance Inventory (WAI; Horvath & Greenberg, 1989), along with patient outcome assessed by overall psychological dysfunction (Lambert et al., 2002). Through controlling for several time points across therapy and previous symptom levels, the RCT found that patients who showed greater TA at a specific time point also showed symptom improvement. This evidence indicates that TA may be causally related to patient outcome as an increase in the TA preceded symptom reduction. Therefore, not only is the TA a pan-theoretical factor that is related to patient outcome, it is perhaps also a way that therapists can deliver a direct improvement in patient outcome. 

## Developing a strong therapeutic alliance early in therapy

An additional insight provided from the aforementioned research is that patients who developed a strong TA earlier in the therapy benefited more in outcome (Zilcha-Mano & Errazuriz, 2015). One explanation for these findings may be that the existing traits or predispositions of some patients are more conducive to forming a strong alliance with the therapist (DeRubeis, Brotman & Gibbons, 2005; Zilcha-Mano, 2017). For example, patients in psychotherapy with insecure or avoidant attachment styles may find it difficult to form the deep and satisfactory relationship necessary for a strong TA early in treatment; whereas, those with a secure attachment style are perhaps less likely to find this problematic (Bowlby, 1988). Empirical evidence supports the idea that insecure representations of the self and others predict a weak TA (Smith, Msetfi & Golding, 2010). Importantly, this suggests that therapists should focus their efforts on developing a TA which places more emphasise on the bond alliance if clients struggle to form a strong relationship (Zilcha-Mano, 2017). For instance, therapist delivery methods can draw on practices taken from cognitive analytic therapy (CAT) as this focuses heavily on the TA (Bennett, Parry & Ryle, 2006). Examples of building a bond alliance in practice may include adopting the language of the patient, and more importantly, acknowledging that the patient-therapist relationship contributes to reinforcing or breaking the patient’s negative interpersonal patterns. Although the empirical support for CAT is limited, there is evidence of successful RCTs even amongst those with complex personality disorders that attribute much of their current distress to past relationships (Calvert & Kellett, 2014). Therefore, the way that the therapist builds a bond alliance with the patient during this early therapy period is an important indicator of beneficial patient outcome.

## The moderating effects of therapeutic alliance

In addition to TA enhancing patients’ outcome directly, it may also operate by indirectly influencing other non-specific therapy elements. The extent to which the therapist follows the therapy protocol is referred to as treatment adherence, and this may be one mechanism that explains how TA facilitates patients’ outcome (Collyer, Eisler & Woolgar, 2018; Tschuschke et al., 2015). In a naturalistic study consisting of 262 therapy sessions using 8 different psychotherapies, Tschuschke and colleagues (2015) examined the relationship between treatment adherence and other common therapy factors including TA. Ratings for treatment adherence were rigorously assessed by therapists and raters who were blind to the motive of the study. The Helping Alliance Questionnaire (HAQ; Bassler, Potratz & Krauthauser, 1995) was used to assess TA, and the scale items were sufficiently correlated, providing a high internal consistency for the scale. The findings revealed that treatment adherence was significantly predicted by TA and the therapist’s competence. Insight from a recent critical review of the TA in exposure therapy for anxiety-related disorders may provide an explanation for how TA moderates the effect of treatment adherence (Buchholz & Abramowitz, 2020). Exposure therapy requires the patient to gradually confront the feared stimuli over several sessions. A strong TA motivates patients to finish exposure therapy sessions, which leads to a reduction in anxiety-related symptoms. The encouragement and support provided by the therapist may therefore be a necessary component in treatment adherence. Whilst Tschuschke and colleagues did not focus on anxiety-related disorders specifically, TA is seen as a non-specific therapeutic factor that can be of benefit across many, if not all, psychotherapies (Barber, Khalsa & Sharpless, 2010; Webb et al., 2012). Therefore, it is useful for therapists to be aware of the indirect, moderating effects of building a TA. This can help tailor the delivery of psychotherapy to the patient’s needs in order to enhance treatment success.

## Ruptures and repairs

Furthermore, the ruptures and repairs that occur within therapy are one of the potential underlying mechanisms that improve the TA and patient outcome (Eubanks, Muran & Safran, 2018; Safran, Muran & Eubanks, 2011). A rupture is a breakdown in TA, often due to a challenging emotional bond, a disagreement on the therapy goals, or a dispute over the therapy tasks (Safran & Muran, 2000). Meta-analytic research has indicated that the occurrence of ruptures which are then resolved (i.e., rupture-repair) are moderately associated with positive patient outcome (Safran et al., 2011). Additionally, outcomes can be improved through rupture-repair training (Eubanks et al., 2018). Based on these findings, there are research-supported practices that therapists can deliver to benefit the client. For example, a therapist should be alert to potential ruptures, which may be apparent through patient hostility or dissatisfaction. More so, the therapist should empathise with the client and take responsibility for their contribution to ruptures (Eubanks et al., 2018). These therapeutic practices within the alliance may be inextricably linked to therapist responsiveness (i.e., adapting to the patient’s behaviour; Webb et al., 2010). Thus, ruptures that occur throughout psychotherapy which are dealt with by the therapist’s responsive behaviour will develop the TA, which may provide the necessary understanding and collaboration to reduce the patient’s difficulties. 

## Conclusion

In summary, it is clear that the therapist’s delivery of treatment can benefit from forming a strong TA. Despite other common therapist factors, such as therapist competence, contributing to psychotherapy success, an abundance of meta-analytic research has highlighted the robust association between TA and improved outcomes for patients. What is more, the therapist not only enhances patients’ outcomes through improving the dyadic relationship, but additionally through increasing adherence to treatment. Research which has measured TA and patient outcome across the duration of psychotherapy has indicated that TA may well precede symptom reduction in patients. Additionally, this line of research suggests that those who form a strong TA early in therapy benefit more in outcome.  Nevertheless, an important aspect of establishing a strong TA is based on the therapist’s responsiveness to ruptures that will inevitably arise throughout psychotherapy. Taken together, the aforementioned research suggests that patients’ difficulties can be reduced by the therapist delivering psychotherapy in a manner that is conducive to improving the TA.

